First draft for the PEG parser PEP (#1)
we-like-parsers/peps: pep-9999.rst

PEP: 9999
Title: New PEG parser for CPython
Version: $Revision$
Last-Modified: $Date$
Author: Guido van Rossum <guido@python.org>,
 Pablo Galindo <pablogsal@gmail.com>,
 Lysandros Nikolaou <lisandrosnik@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: Python-Dev <python-dev@python.org>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 24-March-2020

========
Overview
========

> This PEP proposes to substitue the current LL(1)-based parser of CPython

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This PEP proposes to substitute the current LL(1)-based parser of CPython
```

> by a new PEG-based parser. This new parser will allow to eliminate the multiple

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with a new PEG-based parser. This new parser will allow to eliminate the multiple
```

> by a new PEG-based parser. This new parser will allow to eliminate the multiple

Reviewer: I think that the correct preposition for "substitute" is "for".

Reviewer 2: IMO s/substitute/replace/

> "hacks" that exist in the current grammar to circunvent the LL(1)-limitation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"hacks" that exist in the current grammar to circumvent the LL(1)-limitation
```

while substantially reducing the maintainance costs in some areas related to the
compiling pipeline such as the grammar, the parser and the AST generation. The new PEG
parser will also lift the LL(1) restriction over the current Python grammar.

=========
Rationale
=========

The current Python grammar is an LL(1)-based grammar. A grammar can be said

> to be LL(1) if it can be parser by an LL(1) parser, which in turn is defined

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to be LL(1) if it can be parsed by an LL(1) parser, which in turn is defined
```

as a top-down parser that parses the input from Left to right, performing

> Leftmost derivation of the sentence, and can only use 1 token of lookahead

Reviewer: ```suggestion
leftmost derivation of the sentence, and can only use one token of lookahead
```

when parsing a sentence. LL(1) parsers and grammars are usually known for being
efficient and simple to implement and generate (the current parser is actually
generated from the grammar file) but the reality is that expressing some constructs
currently present in the Python language is notably difficult or impossible with

> such restriction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
such a restriction.
```

> As LL(1) parsers can only look one token lookahead to disinguish possibilities, some

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As LL(1) parsers can only look one token ahead to disinguish possibilities, some
```

rules in the grammar may be ambiguous. For instance the rule::

    rule: A | B
  
is ambiguous if the first sets (the collection of all the terminals that a certain rule
can start with) of both *A* and *B* have some elements in common. This is due to the fact
that if the parser sees a token in the input program that both *A* and *B* can start with

> is impossible for it to deduce which option must be followed as no further token of the program

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it is impossible for it to deduce which option to expand as no further token of the program
```

> can be examined to disambiguate. This problem happens very commonly in the Python grammar,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can be examined to disambiguate. This problem happens very frequently in the Python grammar,
```

for instance in the rule for assignment expressions::

    namedexpr_test: NAME [':=' test]

This simple rule is not compatible with the Python grammar as *NAME* is among the elements of the
first set of the rule *test*. To work around this limitation the actual rule that appears in the
current grammar is::

    namedexpr_test: test [':=' test]

> This is a much broad rule that the previous one allowing constructs like ``[x for x in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a much broader rule than the previous one allowing constructs like ``[x for x in
```

y] := [1,2,3]`` and the way the rule is limited to its desired form is by disallowing
these unwanted constructions when transforming the parse tree to the abstract syntax
tree. This is not only inelegant but a considerable maintainace burden as it couples

> the AST creation routines with the actual parsing, making the actual grammarfile not reflect

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the AST creation routines with the actual parsing, leading to the actual grammar file not reflecting
```

correctly what the *actual* grammar is (that is, the collection of all valid Python programs).

> Similar workarounds appears in multiple other rules of the current grammar. Some times

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar workarounds appear in multiple other rules of the current grammar. Sometimes
```

> this problem is unsolvable. For instance in `bpo-12782: Multiple context expressions do

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this problem is unsolvable. For instance, `bpo-12782: Multiple context expressions do
```

not support parentheses for continuation across lines

> <http://bugs.python.org/issue12782>`_ that shows how making an LL(1) rule that supports

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<http://bugs.python.org/issue12782>`_ shows how making an LL(1) rule that supports
```

writting::

  with (
      open("a_really_long_foo") as foo,
      open("a_really_long_baz") as baz,
      open("a_really_long_bar") as bar
  ):
    ...

is not possible due to the fact that the first sets of the grammar items that can
appear as context managers include the open parenthesis, making the rule ambiguous.

> This rule is not only consistent with other pars of the language (like the rule for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This rule is not only consistent with other parts of the language (like the rule for
```

> This rule is not only consistent with other pars of the language (like the rule for

Reviewer 2: pars -> parts

> multiple imports) but is also very useful to auto-formatter tools as parenthesized

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
multiple imports), but is also very useful to auto-formatter tools, as parenthesized
```

> multiple imports) but is also very useful to auto-formatter tools as parenthesized

Reviewer 2: Comma before "but" and another after "tools".

> multiple imports) but is also very usefull to auto-formatter tools as parenthesized

Reviewer: ```suggestion
multiple imports) but is also very useful to auto-formatter tools as parenthesized
```

groups are normally used to group together elements to be formatted together (in the

> same way the tools operate on the contents of lists, sets...). This limitation also makes

Reviewer: It seems that something is missing here.

Additionally, another limitation of LL(1) grammars is that left-recursion is not
supported. This makes writing some rules very unnatural and far from how programmers

> thing about the program. For instance this construct::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
think about the program. For instance this construct::
```

  expr: expr '+' term | term

cannot be parsed by an LL(1) parser. The traditional remedy is to rewrite the grammar to

> circunvent the problem::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
circumvent the problem::
```

  expr: term ('+' term)*

The problem that appears with this form is that the parse tree is forced to have a very unnatural
shape. This is because with this rule, for the input program ``a + b + c`` the parse tree will be

> flatten (``['a', '+', 'b', '+', 'c']``) and must be post-processed to construct a left-recursive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
flattened (``['a', '+', 'b', '+', 'c']``) and must be post-processed to construct a left-recursive
```

> parse tree (``[['a', '+', 'b'], '+', 'c']``). Being forced to write the second rule not only makes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parse tree (``[['a', '+', 'b'], '+', 'c']``). Being forced to write the second rule not only leads to
```

> the parse tree not reflect correctly the desired associativity but also imposes further presure in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the parse tree not correctly reflecting the desired associativity, but also imposes further pressure on
```

> further compilation stages to detect and post-process these cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
later compilation stages to detect and post-process these cases.
```

> later compilation stages to detect and post-process these cases.

Reviewer 2: Reformat this paragraph.

One last problem of the current parser is that there is a huge coupling between the AST
generation routines and the particular shape of the produced parse trees. This makes

> the code for generating the AST specially complicated as many actions are implicit. For

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the code for generating the AST especially complicated as many actions are implicit. For
```

> instance, the AST generation code knows what alternatives of a certain rule are produce

Reviewer: ```suggestion
instance, the AST generation code knows what alternatives of a certain rule are produced
```

based on the number of child nodes present in a given parse node. This makes the code

> difficult to follow as this property is not explicit and not directly related to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
difficult to follow as this property is not explicit, not directly related to the
```

> grammar file and is very influenced by implementation details (like the one in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
grammar file and influenced by implementation details (like the one in the
```

previous paragraph). As a result of this, a consierable ammount of the AST generation
code needs to deal with inspecting and reasoning about the particular shape of the
parse trees that it receives.

> The new parser machinery that we propose tackles all this problems while lifting the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new parser machinery that we propose tackles all these problems while lifting the
```

> aformentioned LL(1) restriction in the Grammar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
aforementioned LL(1) restriction in the Grammar.
```

=============
Specification
=============

> A PEG (Parser Expression Grammar) grammar differs from a context-free grammar (like the current one)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A PEG (Parsing Expression Grammar) grammar differs from a context-free grammar (like the current one)
```

> A PEG (Parsing Expression Grammar) grammar differs from a context-free grammar (like the current one)

Reviewer 2: Reformat most text from this point -- the lines are being wrapped on my screen.

> in the fact that the way is written reflects more how the parser will operate when parsing it. The fundamental

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the fact that the way it is written more closely reflects how the parser will operate when parsing it. The fundamental
```

techincal difference is that the choice operator is ordered. This means that when writting::

  rule: A | B | C

a context-free-grammar parser (like an LL(1) parser) will generate constructions that given an input string

> will *deduce* wich alternative (*A*, *B* or *C*) must be followd while a PEG parser will check if the first

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will *deduce* which alternative (*A*, *B* or *C*) must be expanded, while a PEG parser will check if the first
```

> alternative succeeds and only if it fails it will continue with the second one or the third one in the order

Reviewer: ```suggestion
alternative succeeds and only if it fails, will it continue with the second or the third one in the order
```

> in which they are written. This makes the choice operator not conmutative. Compared with LL(1) parsers, PEG

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in which they are written. This makes the choice operator not commutative. Compared with LL(1) parsers, PEG
```

I'd also go for a new paragraph here.

> parser have infinite lookahead (this means that they can consider an arbitrary number of tokens before deciding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parsers have infinite lookahead (this means that they can consider an arbitrary number of tokens before deciding
```

for a rule). Our proposed implementation (as is commonly done) uses a techique called "packrat parsing" which
which not only loads the entire program in memory before parsing it, but also allows the parser to backtrack
arbitrarily. This is made efficient by memoizing the rules already matched for each position. The cost of the
memoization cache is that the parser will naturally use more memory than a simple LL(1) parser, which normally
are table-based. We will explain later in this document why we consider this cost acceptable.

PEG parsers normally do not support left recursion but we have implemented a technique similar to the one described
in Medeiros et al. [1]_ but using the memoization cache instead of static variables. This approach is closer to the
one described in Warth et al. [2]_. This allows us to write not only simple left-recursive rules but also more

> complicated rules that involve indirect indirect left-recusion like::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
complicated rules that involve indirect left-recusion like::
```

  rule1: rule2 | 'a'
  rule2: rule3 | 'b'
  rule3: rule1 | 'c'

and "hidden left-recursion" like::

  rule: 'optional'? rule '@' some_other_rule

In order to avoid the intermediate steps that obscure the relationship between the grammar and the AST generation the

> proposed PEG parser allows to generate directly AST pieces for a rule via grammar actions. Grammar actions are pieces

Reviewer: ```suggestion
proposed PEG parser allows directly generating AST pieces for a rule via grammar actions. Grammar actions are
```

> of C code that are executed when a grammar rule is succesfully parsed. This allows to directly describe how the AST

Reviewer: ```suggestion
C expressions that are evaluated, when a grammar rule is succesfully parsed. This allows to directly describe how the AST
```

is composed in the grammar itself, making it more clear and maintainable. This AST generation process is supported

> by the use of some helper functions that factor common AST object manipulations and some other required operations that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by the use of some helper functions that factor out common AST object manipulations and some other required operations that
```

are not directly related to the grammar.

The new proposed PEG parser contains the following pieces:

* A parser generator that can read a grammar file and produce a PEG parser
  written in Python or C that can parse said grammar.

* A PEG meta-grammar that automatically generates a Python parser that is used
  for the parser generator itself (this means that there are no manually-written
  parsers).

* A generated parser (using the parser generator) that can directly produce C and

>   Python AST objects directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Python AST objects.
```

currently present in the Python language is notably difficult or impossible with
such a restriction. As LL(1) parsers can only look one token ahead to disinguish
possibilities, some rules in the grammar may be ambiguous. For instance the rule::

    rule: A | B
  
is ambiguous if the *first sets* of both ``A`` and ``B`` have some elements in
common. This is due to the fact that if the parser sees a token in the input
program that both *A* and *B* can start with it is impossible for it to deduce
which option to expand as no further token of the program can be examinedto
disambiguate. As will be shown later in this document, the current LL(1)-based
grammar suffers a lot from thisscenario.

Also is relevant to note (as other sections of this document will deal with this
concept) that a grammar cannot be LL(1) if it is left recursive. A grammar is
left-recursive if and only if there exists a nonterminal that can derive to a
sentential form with itself as theleftmost symbol. For instance this rule:::

    rule: rule 'a'
  
is left-recursive because the rule can be expanded to a expression that starts
with itself. As will be described later, left-recursion can be very useful to

> express some desired properties in the directly in the grammar and the lack of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
express some desired properties directly in the grammar and the lack of
```

it can lead to some undesired scenarios.

=========================
Background on PEG parsers
=========================

A PEG (Parsing Expression Grammar) grammar differs from a context-free grammar
(like the current one) in the fact that the way it is written more closely
reflects how the parser will operate when parsing it. The fundamental techincal

> difference is that the choice operator is ordered. This means that when writting::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
difference is that the choice operator is ordered. This means that when writing::
```

  rule: A | B | C

a context-free-grammar parser (like an LL(1) parser) will generate constructions
that given an input string will *deduce* which alternative (``A``, ``B`` or ``C``)
must be expanded, while a PEG parser will check if the first alternative succeeds
and only if it fails, will it continue with the second or the third one in the
order in which they are written. This makes the choice operator not commutative.

Unlike LL(1) parsers PEG-based parsers cannot be ambiguous: if a string parses,
it has exactly one valid parse tree. This means that a PEG-based parser cannot
suffer from the ambiguity problems described in the previous section.

> PEG parsers are usually constructed as recursive descent parser in which every

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PEG parsers are usually constructed as a recursive descent parser in which every
```

rule in the grammar corresponds to a function in the program implementing the
parser and the parsing expression (the "expansion" or "definition" of the rule)
represents the "code" in said function. Each parsing function conceptually takes
an input string as its argument, and yields one of the following results:

* A "success" result. This result indicates that the expression can be parsed by
  that rule and the function may optionally move forward or consume one or more
  characters of the input string supplied to it.
* A "failure" result, in which case no input is consumed.

Notice that "failure" results do not imply that the program is incorrect or a
parsing failure because as the choice operator is ordered, a "failure" result
merely indiates "try the following option". A direct implementation of a PEG
parser as a recursive descent parser will present exponential time performance in
the worst case as compared with LL(1) parsers, PEG parsers have infinite lookahead

> (this means that they can consider an arbitrary number of tokensbefore deciding

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(this means that they can consider an arbitrary number of tokens before deciding
```

b + c`` the parse tree will be flattened (``['a', '+', 'b', '+', 'c']``) and must
be post-processed to construct a left-recursive parse tree (``[['a', '+', 'b'],
'+', 'c']``). Being forced to write the second rule not only leads to the parse
tree not correctly reflecting the desired associativity, but also imposes further
pressure on later compilation stages to detect and post-process these cases.

-----------------------
Intermediate parse tree
-----------------------

The last problem present in the current parser is the intermediate creation of a
parse tree or Concrete Syntax Tree that is later transformed to an Abstract Syntax
Tree. Although the construction of a CST is very common in parser and compiler
pipelines, in CPython this intermediate CST is not used by anything else (it is
only indirectly exposed by the *parser* module and a surprisingly small part of
the code in the CST production is reused in the module). Which is worse: the whole
tree is kept in memory, keeping many branches that consist on chains of nodes with
a single children. This has shown to consume a considerable ammount of memory (for

> instance in `bpo-26451: Excessivepeak memory consumption by the Python

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
instance in `bpo-26451: Excessive peak memory consumption by the Python
```

parser <https://bugs.python.org/issue26415>`_).

Having to produce an intermediate result between the grammar and the AST is not only
undersirable but also makes the AST generation step much more complicated, raising

> considerably the maintainande burden.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
considerably the maintainance burden.
```

  rule1: rule2 | 'a'
  rule2: rule3 | 'b'
  rule3: rule1 | 'c'

and "hidden left-recursion" like::

  rule: 'optional'? rule '@' some_other_rule

------
Syntax
------

The grammar consists of a sequence of rules of the form: ::

   rule_name: expression

Optionally, a type can be included right after the rule name, which
specifies the return type of the C or Python function corresponding to
the rule: ::

   rule_name[return_type]: expression

If the return type is omitted, then a ``void *`` is returned in C and an
``Any`` in Python. 

The full meta-grammar for the grammars supported by the PEG generator is:

::

    start[Grammar]: grammar ENDMARKER { grammar }

    grammar[Grammar]:
        | metas rules { Grammar(rules, metas) }
        | rules { Grammar(rules, []) }

    metas[MetaList]:
        | meta metas { [meta] + metas }
        | meta { [meta] }

    meta[MetaTuple]:
        | "@" NAME NEWLINE { (name.string, None) }
        | "@" a=NAME b=NAME NEWLINE { (a.string, b.string) }
        | "@" NAME STRING NEWLINE { (name.string, literal_eval(string.string)) }

    rules[RuleList]:
        | rule rules { [rule] + rules }
        | rule { [rule] }

    rule[Rule]:

>         | rulename ":" alts NEWLINE INDENT more_alts DEDENT { Rule(rulename[0], rulename[1], Rhs(alts.alts + more_alts.alts)) }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        | rulename ":" alts NEWLINE INDENT more_alts DEDENT {
              Rule(rulename[0], rulename[1], Rhs(alts.alts + more_alts.alts)) }
```

        | '~' {Cut()}

    item[Item]:
        | '[' ~ alts ']' {Opt(alts)}
        |  atom '?' {Opt(atom)}
        |  atom '*' {Repeat0(atom)}
        |  atom '+' {Repeat1(atom)}
        |  sep=atom '.' node=atom '+' {Gather(sep, node)}
        |  atom {atom}

    atom[Plain]:
        | '(' ~ alts ')' {Group(alts)}
        | NAME {NameLeaf(name.string) }
        | STRING {StringLeaf(string.string)}

    # Mini-grammar for the actions

    action[str]: "{" ~ target_atoms "}" { target_atoms }

    target_atoms[str]:
        | target_atom target_atoms { target_atom + " " + target_atoms }
        | target_atom { target_atom }

    target_atom[str]:
        | "{" ~ target_atoms "}" { "{" + target_atoms + "}" }
        | NAME { name.string }
        | NUMBER { number.string }
        | STRING { string.string }
        | "?" { "?" }
        | ":" { ":" }

Grammar Expressions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``# comment``
'''''''''''''

Python-style comments.

``e1 e2``
'''''''''

Match e1, then match e2.

::

   rule_name: first_rule second_rule

.. _e1-e2-1:

``e1 | e2``
'''''''''''

Match e1 or e2.

The first alternative can also appear on the line after the rule name

> for formatting purposes. In that case, a \| can also be used before the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for formatting purposes. In that case, a \| must be used before the
```

first alternative, like so:

::

   rule_name[return_type]:
       | first_alt
       | second_alt

``( e )``
'''''''''

Match e.

::

   rule_name: (e)

A slightly more complex and useful example includes using the grouping
operator together with the repeat operators:

::

   rule_name: (e1 e2)*

``[ e ] or e?``
'''''''''''''''

> Optinally match e.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Optionally match e.
```

::

   rule_name: [e]

A more useful example includes defining that a trailing comma is
optional:

::

   rule_name: e (',' e)* [',']

.. _e-1:

``e*``
''''''

Match zero or more occurences of e.

::

   rule_name: (e1 e2)*

.. _e-2:

``e+``
''''''

Match one or more occurences of e.

::

   rule_name: (e1 e2)+

``s.e+``
''''''''

Match one or more occurences of e, separated by s. The generated parse

> tree does not include the separator. This is identical to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
tree does not include the separator. This is otherwise identical to
```

``(e (s e)*)``.

::

   rule_name: ','.e+

.. _e-3:

``&e``
''''''

Succeed if e can be parsed, without consuming any input.

.. _e-4:

``!e``
''''''

Fail if e can be parsed, without consuming any input.

> An example taken from ``data/simpy.gram`` specifies that a primary

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An example taken from the proposed Python grammar specifies that a primary
```

consists of an atom, which is not followed by a ``.`` or a ``(`` or a
``[``:

::

   primary: atom !'.' !'(' !'['

.. _e-5:

> ``~e``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``~``
```

''''''

Commit to the current alternative, even if it fails to parse.

::

   rule_name: '(' ~ some_rule ')' | some_alt

In this example, if a left parenthesis is parsed, then the other
alternative won’t be considered, even if some_rule or ‘)’ fail to be
parsed.

Variables in the Grammar
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A subexpression can be named by preceding it with an identifier and an

> ``=`` sign. The name can then be used in the action, like this: ::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``=`` sign. The name can then be used in the action (see below), like this: ::
```

   rule_name[return_type]: '(' a=some_other_rule ')' { a }

---------------
Grammar actions
---------------

In order to avoid the intermediate steps that obscure the relationship between the
grammar and the AST generation the proposed PEG parser allows directly generating

> AST pieces for a rule via grammar actions. Grammar actions are C expressions that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
AST nodes for a rule via grammar actions. Grammar actions are C expressions that
```

are evaluated, when a grammar rule is succesfully parsed. This allows to directly
describe how the AST is composed in the grammar itself, making it more clear and
maintainable. This AST generation process is supported by the use of some helper
functions that factor out common AST object manipulations and some other required
operations that are not directly related to the grammar.

To indicate these actions each alternative can be followed by a the action code
inside curly-braces, which specifies the return value of the alternative:::

   rule_name[return_type]:
       | first_alt1 first_alt2 { first_alt1 }
       | second_alt1 second_alt2 { second_alt1 }

If the action is omitted and C code is being generated, then there are two
different possibilities: 1. If there’s a single name in the alternative, this gets

> returned. 2. If not, a dummy name object gets returned.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
returned. 2. If not, a dummy name object gets returned (this case should be avoided).
```

If Python code is being generated, then a list with all the parsed

> expressions gets returned.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
expressions gets returned if no action is specified (this is meant for debugging).
```

As an illustrative example this simple grammar file allows to directly generate a full
parser that can parse simple aritmetic expressions and that returns a valid Python AST:

::

    start[mod_ty]: a=stmt* $ { Module(a, NULL, p->arena) }
    stmt[stmt_ty]: a=expr_stmt { a }
    expr_stmt[stmt_ty]: a=expression NEWLINE { _Py_Expr(a, EXTRA}

>     expression[expr_ty]: ( l=expression '+' r=term { _Py_BinOp(l, Add, r, EXTRA}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    expr_stmt[stmt_ty]: a=expression NEWLINE { _Py_Expr(a, EXTRA) }
    expression[expr_ty]: ( l=expression '+' r=term { _Py_BinOp(l, Add, r, EXTRA) }
```

>                         | l=expression '-' r=term { _Py_BinOp(l, Sub, r, EXTRA}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                        | l=expression '-' r=term { _Py_BinOp(l, Sub, r, EXTRA) }
```

                        | t=term { t }
                        )
    term[expr_ty]: ( l=term '*' r=factor { _Py_BinOp(l, Mult, r, EXTRA }

>                   | l=term '/' r=factor { _Py_BinOp(l, Div, r, EXTRA}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                  | l=term '/' r=factor { _Py_BinOp(l, Div, r, EXTRA) }
```

                  | f=factor { f }
                  )
    factor[expr_ty]: ('(' e=expression ')' { e }
                    | a=atom { a }
                    )
    atom[expr_ty]: ( n=NAME { n }
                  | n=NUMBER { n }
                  | s=STRING { s }
                  )

here ``EXTRA`` is a macro that expands to ``start_lineno, start_col_offset,
end_lineno, end_col_offset, p->arena``, being the values for this variables

> automatically injected by the parser.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
automatically injected by the parser; ``p`` points to an object
that holds on to all state for the parser.
```

==============
Migration plan
==============

This section describes the migration plan when porting to the new PEG-based parser
if this PEP is accepted. Migration will be executed in a series of steps that allow
initially to fallback to the previous parser if neeed:

1.- Before Python 3.9 beta 1, include the new PEG-based parser machinery in CPython
    with a command-line flag and environment variable that allows to switch between
    the new and the old parsers together with explicit APIs that allow to invoke the
    new and the old parsers independently. At this step, all Python APIs like ``ast.parse``
    and ``compile`` will use the parser set by the flags or the environment variable and
    the default parser will be the current parser.

2.- After Python 3.9 Beta 1 the default parser will be the new parser.

3.- Between Python 3.9 and Python 3.10, the old parser and related code (like the
    "parser" module) will be kept until a new Python release happens (Python 3.10). In
    the meanwhile and until the old parser is removed, **no new Python Grammar
    addition will be added that requires the peg parser**. This means that the grammar

>     kill be kept LL(1) until the old parser is removed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    will be kept LL(1) until the old parser is removed.
```

4.- In Python 3.10, remove the old parser, the command-line flag, the environment
    variable and the "parser" module and related code.

==========================
Performance and validation
==========================

TBD

==============
Rejected Ideas
==============

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

TBD

==========
References
==========

```

.. [#GUIDO_PEG]

>    Guido series on PEG parsing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Guido's series on PEG parsing
```

compiling pipeline such as the grammar, the parser and the AST generation. The new PEG
parser will also lift the LL(1) restriction over the current Python grammar.

===========================
Background on LL(1) parsers
===========================

The current Python grammar is an LL(1)-based grammar. A grammar can be said to be

> 

Reviewer 2: Drop this line.
```suggestion
```

LL(1) if it can be parsed by an LL(1) parser, which in turn is defined as a

> top-down parser that parses the input from Left to right, performing leftmost

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
top-down parser that parses the input from left to right, performing leftmost
```

derivation of the sentence, and can only use one token of lookahead when parsing a
sentence. The traditional approach to construct or generate an LL(1) parser is to
produce a *parse table* which encodes the possible transitions between all possible
states of the parser. These tables are normally constructed from the *frist sets*
and the *follow sets* of the grammar:

* Given a rule, the *first set* are the collection of all terminals that can occur
  first in a full derivation of that rule. Intuitively this helps the parser decide
  among multiple alternatives if a rule can have multiple possibilities. For
  instance, given the rule ::
  
      rule: A | B
  
  if only ``A`` can start with the terminal *a* and only ``B`` can start with the
  terminal *b* and the parser sees the token *b* when parsing this rule, it knows

>   that it needs to followthe non-terminal ``B``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  that it needs to follow the non-terminal ``B``.
```

* Given a rule, the *follow set* are the collection of terminals that can appear

>   inmediately to the right of that rule in a partial derivation. Intuitively This

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  immediately to the right of that rule in a partial derivation. Intuitively this
```

  solves the problem in which a rule can expand to the empty string. For instance,

>   considering given this rule::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  given this rule::
```

    rule: A 'b'
  
  if the parser has the token *b* and the rule A can only start with the token *a*

>   we know is an invalid program but if A can be expanded also to the empty string

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  we know it is an invalid program but if A can be expanded also to the empty string
```

The Python grammar does not allow ε-productions so the *follow sets* are not
needed when creating the parse tables. Currently in CPython, a parser generator
program reads the grammar and produces a parsing table representing a set of
deterministic finite automata (DFA) that can be included in a C program, the
parser, which is a pushdown automaton that uses this data to produce a Concrete
Syntax Tree (CST) sometimes known directly as a "parse tree". In this process the
*first sets* are used indirectly when generating the DFAs.

LL(1) parsers and grammars are usually known for being efficient and simple to
implement and generate the but the reality is that expressing some constructs
currently present in the Python language is notably difficult or impossible with
such a restriction. As LL(1) parsers can only look one token ahead to disinguish
possibilities, some rules in the grammar may be ambiguous. For instance the rule::

    rule: A | B
  
is ambiguous if the *first sets* of both ``A`` and ``B`` have some elements in
common. This is due to the fact that if the parser sees a token in the input
program that both *A* and *B* can start with it is impossible for it to deduce

> which option to expand as no further token of the program can be examinedto

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which option to expand as no further token of the program can be examined to
```

disambiguate. As will be shown later in this document, the current LL(1)-based

> grammar suffers a lot from thisscenario.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
grammar suffers a lot from this scenario.
```

> Also is relevant to note (as other sections of this document will deal with this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Also it is relevant to note (as other sections of this document will deal with this
```

concept) that a grammar cannot be LL(1) if it is left recursive. A grammar is
left-recursive if and only if there exists a nonterminal that can derive to a

> sentential form with itself as theleftmost symbol. For instance this rule:::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sentential form with itself as the leftmost symbol. For instance this rule::
```
